# Log of changes
* 1/27/2021: switched to wowchemy
* 4/29/2020: tried to change to academic 4.8, broke publication author order, switched back to 4.7. Uploaded latest site to serve.

# Website structure
* /content should contain all content in subfolders, apart from content in /static, see below
* /assets contains files for customized formatting, and the site logo
* /config contains toml configuration files, edit as needed
* /data and /i18n contain copies of files in the same folders of /academic which overwrite those. Needed for custom publication types or other customization
* /myresources contains this file and other files I might need for writing the page.
* /public is the folder created by hugo for deployment. Don't edit. This folder is not synced over to github! Netlify automatically pulls the github folder and builds the site using hugo. For deployment to UGA server, copy the whole folder over.
* /resources folder seems to be generated by hugo, leave alone
* /static contains my images and files that are linked from other sites. Also can contain slides and other content. See more below.
* /themes folder should contain the /academic theme/folder with all subfolders. Update that to new version as needed.

# Content folder
This folder contains allmost all written content. Subfolders are:
* /authors contains every group member. (paper co-authors that are not group members don't need to be included).
* /home specifies the widgets shown on the main page.
* /opportunities is the content for the page of that name. split between an index file for the overall page and the actual widget containing the content.
* /people contains meta-information for the people section. all actual information is drawn from the /authors folder.
* /post contains new posts. each post should be a subfolder.
* /project contains all projects as subfolders.
* /projects contains the meta-information for the projects, the actual information is drawn from the /project folder.
* /publication contains all papers. generated as described below.
* /resources is the content for the page of that name

# Things to remember
* Save your icon as a square 512x512 pixel image named icon.png and place the image in your root assets/images/ folder, creating the assets and images folders if they don't already exist. (https://sourcethemes.com/academic/docs/customization/)

# Slides and other content
* Store slides made as Rmd files as sub-folders in /static and render them by hand into html. Otherwise they get automatically rendered into the wrong html format when running build_site(). See more here:
https://bookdown.org/yihui/blogdown/static-files.html

# Tracking
* Google Analytics is implemented. This is set up by specifying the analytics tag in params.toml

# General notes
I'm not using regular pages at this point. Instead, stand-alone pages (e.g. resources) are done using the 'blank' widget. That makes things consistent for the academic theme (though likely won't port easily to different themes).

# To update Academic theme
* Find current version in themes/academic/data/academic.toml
* Fullow update guide: https://sourcethemes.com/academic/docs/update/

# To add new group members
* Copy an existing entry in the authors sub-folder, modify as needed

# To add new blog posts
* Use RStudio addin, or easier, copy/paste/modify an existing entry 

# To add new projects
* copy/paste/modify an existing entry 

# To add new publications 

Note: the academic import tool is not working on main office computer, works on laptop.

* pull new pubs into zotero "mynewrefs" folder 
* add entry to 'mynewbibs.bib' file. Include abstract. Can do that by pulling website article from zotero or through myncbi.
* Run the academic tool for publications: academic import --bibtex <path_to_your/publications.bib>
* More details on how to use it: https://wowchemy.com/docs/content/publications/
* Make sure folder is not the actual website since we don't want existing pubs overwritten, otherwise they'll loose their special formatting.
* Copy the new entries into the main /publication folder. Rename folders following my own scheme.
* Add a pdf to each publication folder with the same name as the folder for that publication
* adjust each index.md to set custom publication type 
* My custom publication types are in data/publication_types.toml and their names are in publications.md in content/home describes the different types
This also needs to be adjusted in /i8n/en.yaml
To adjust labels/categories for publications, edit a layout file, then adjust numbers in publications:
https://github.com/gcushen/hugo-academic/issues/906

See also here for (new?) tool:
https://github.com/wowchemy/hugo-academic-cli

# To build site
run blogdown::build_site()
run blogdown::serve_site() for live preview

# To deploy site
1. Connect to UGA VPN
2. Mount network drive to \\128.192.39.205\ahgroup, connect with myid\ahandel
3. Copy everything in public/ to the main directory on the server

# To-do
* do some SEO once site is finished
 


